---
layout: post
title:  "Simulated ball of mud"
date:   2021-12-13 21:11:58 -0700
categories: simulated universe
---

Recently I've given much thought to the simulation hypothesis, mainly after reading the following books
- The simulation hypothesis
- The simulated multiverse
- A thousand brains
- Our mathematical universe
- G E B

There are bad ideas, good ideas, great ideas, and stupidly crazy ideas in all of these books. To summarize these psychologically challenging ideas is obviously out of my capability, but here is my take on why I believe this shit hole of a world we are living in is, more likely than not, simulated. 

Pay attention that I'm saying "simulated", not "un-real" or "does not exist". It feels real enough to me when I pet my cat or trash talk some random strangers on Reddit, what I meant by simulated is that the fundamental building block of our reality is not what we think it is, it is not some physically existing atoms or subatomic particles. Before going further, these are some important ideas from the aforementioned books:

- Our brain only receives signals in the form of electrical spikes, yet almost all of us experience a vivid and colorful world. From neuroscience perspective, what we think we are physically experiencing is just a reconstruction by the brain, there is no way for us to tell if the representation by the brain matches the "true" reality. For e.g: phantom limb phenomenon where a person still experiences pains or itches from the limb that does not exist anymore.
- Turing-complete machine is capable of simulating itself, just search game of life running within game of life, a fascinating simulation.
- Recursion, or self-reference is fundamental to reality as well as intelligence. Intelligence emerges within a infinitely recursive system.
- Reality is discrete, space is already proven to be discrete (Planck length), so is energy (photon). Time is also believed to be discrete (many use the term Planck time). This suggests there is a fundamental lower limit beyond which we cannot know anything of.
- All the spooky quantum effects: the observer problem, quantum entanglement can be explained by simulation hypothesis. If you have ever played video games, you already know that your PC only renders what your character is seeing to optimize performance, no sane developer will ever try to render the entire world. Does this sound like the Young's slits experiments? The exact location of particle will only be defined, or "collapse", when there is someone/something observing it. For quantum entanglement, the reasoning line is sharing data techniques, in video games, you don't need to store 2 independent models for 2 different characters, you only need to store a base model and 2 different sets of details for each character, this leads to a much more optimized architecture.
- Multiverse and decoherence can be explained by running multiple simulations at the same time, where there is some shared states between these simulations.

Ok, so my brain is a ball of mud that is incapable of experiencing the world by itself, it only does so indirectly by constructing a model of the world based on electrical signals fed to it. This brain then, after millions years of evolution, be able to build massively complicated tools to help it ditches deeper into the reality. It then recognizes that the more it explores, the weirder the shit it finds. At some point, the shit it sees gets too fucking weird that the brain starts to think it would just make more sense if the world it sees is a simulation, so either:

- Brain is physically "real", it exists somewhere, everything else is simulated by feeding electrical signals to the brain
- Brain itself is also simulated, everything is in a simulation, and fundamental building block is information stored outside of this simulated world

So what is up with all this? I don't know, I just find it funny that a simulated ball of mud is writing this highly nonsensical essay (if you can even call it that) on a simulation within simulation (if you think about it Internet is our first attempt of simulating another world) where other simulated balls of mud can read some days. Fascinating isn't it? 